JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
And, while Gwen Ifill's away, we
welcome Hari
Sreenivasan.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Happy to help
how I can.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And on the
"NewsHour" tonight:
devastation in Ecuador. A
powerful earthquake
flattens coastal villages and
towns, leaving
thousands injured and a rising
death toll
in its wake.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Monday:
The Supreme Court takes on
President Obama's
controversial immigration
actions which prevent
millions from deportation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Then, as the U.S.
braces for
a rise in cases of the Zika
virus, women and
health officials grapple with
tough questions.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And how a
long-held Hindu
belief in considering cows
sacred is part
of a bigger divide in India's
culture and
politics.
SHASHI THAROOR, Opposition
Member of Parliament:
It's high time that the
government realize
that they're making asses of
themselves and
discrediting an enormously
plural and diverse
civilization.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The death toll in
Ecuador's
devastating earthquake rose to
350 today.
Hundreds more are missing, but
three people
were rescued, after being
trapped for 32 hours.
John Yang reports on the day's
developments.
JOHN YANG: Through a second
night, crews searched
for survivors in the rubble.
Families of the
missing watched anxiously.
BETTY REINA, Ecuador (through
translator):
No, I didn't sleep last night
and I won't
best able to sleep today because
I am distressed
with the desperation to find
them, to see
them, to know they are OK.
JOHN YANG: Daylight broke. More
bodies were
pulled from there debris, and
the devastation
from Saturday night's disaster
lay everywhere.
Stephan Kueffner of The
Economist is watching
from Quito.
STEPHAN KUEFFNER, The Economist:
You start
hearing, like, the window frames
cracking.
You feel the ground shake. Then
you see -- you
look up and see how the lamps
moving. And
then you realize after a couple
of seconds,
no, this is not going to be over
quickly.
JOHN YANG: The quake had a
magnitude of 7.8
and struck about nine miles off
Ecuador's
coast in the Pacific Ocean,
about 100 miles
from the capital city of Quito.
It was the
strongest tremor in decades to
hit the Andean
nation of 16 million.
Drone footage over the
provincial capital
of Portoviejo shows multistory
buildings completely
askew and a ruined
infrastructure. Cars were
crushed, homes teetered at
precarious angles,
and families slept on the
streets, on edge
after hundreds of aftershocks.
JAVIER MENDOZA, Ecuador (through
translator):
Hopefully, we get the support
and help we
need, because we slept in a
field all night.
JOHN YANG: Ecuador's president,
Rafael Correa,
flew back Sunday from a trip to
Italy.
RAFAEL CORREA, President of
Ecuador (through
translator): Downtown Portoviejo
is truly
devastated. The situation is
stabilizing.
It's being coordinated. Aid is
arriving. The
whole country is mobilized. It's
a huge training,
the biggest since the Ambato
earthquake in
1949. But even bigger is the
world and the
Ecuadorian people. We're united
today more
than ever.
JOHN YANG: There's almost
nothing to work
with in some of the hardest-hit
places. Again,
reporter Stephan Kueffner:
STEPHAN KUEFFNER: In the beach
town of Canoa,
the situation is so grave that
there are about
400 homeless people, including
150 children,
with extremely limited supplies.
And the situation
is so -- that bodies are being
taken to the
local park, as they have nowhere
to put them.
JOHN YANG: Relatives consoled
each other outside
Portoviejo's morgue this
morning, as more
and more bodies arrived. The
injured were
treated in makeshift tents set
up by the Red
Cross. More than 2,500 people
hurt.
Diego Castellanos is with the
Red Cross in
Quito.
DIEGO CASTELLANOS, Red Cross:
It's like a
war happened there. They don't
have water.
They are looking for relatives
all the time
during the day, during the
night. And some
of the work or the job that we
are trying
to do with them is just to give
them the support,
and also to give them the food
and the water
and all the support that we can.
JOHN YANG: Meanwhile, aid has
begun to trickle
in from neighboring countries,
including Bolivia.
And a plane loaded with a
47-member Spanish
rescue team left Madrid today.
It also carried
15 tons of humanitarian aid.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
Thousands of rescue workers in
Japan kept
searching for survivors from two
earthquakes
last week. They hit the southern
island of
Kyushu on Thursday night and
again early Saturday,
killing 42 people. The U.S.
military lent
its support today with
tilt-rotor Osprey aircraft
delivering aid.
Landslides and damaged roads
have left hundreds
of people stranded on parts of
the island.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Here in the U.S.,
parts of
Houston are underwater today,
after more than
a foot of rain hit the nation's
fourth largest
city. Some 110,000 homes and
businesses lost
power, schools closed and
hundreds of flights
were canceled. People waded
through waist-deep
water in scores of subdivisions,
and some
used anything that would float
to seek safety.
The city's mayor warned there's
more to come.
SYLVESTER TURNER, Mayor of
Houston, Texas:
The heavy rain appears to be
sagging out of
the area for right now, but if
you look on
the radar system, we can
anticipate some additional
heavy rain probably into late
tonight going
into tomorrow morning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The flood watch
also extended
into Western Louisiana and in
Arkansas.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This was
presidential primary
eve in New York state, with the
front-runners
hoping for big wins tomorrow.
Republican Donald
Trump and Democrat Hillary
Clinton are well
ahead in delegates, but both
have suffered
a string of recent losses.
Meanwhile, 300 people were
arrested at the
U.S. Capitol. It's the latest in
a week's
worth of protests against big
money in politics.
We will return to the
presidential race later
in the program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United States
will send
another 200 troops and for the
first time
attack helicopters to battle the
Islamic State
group in Iraq. In Baghdad,
Defense Secretary
Ash Carter announced the
advisers will be
closer to the front lines. But
the White House
insisted it is not mission
creep.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
This has to be a fight that is
lead by local
forces with the support and
assistance of
the United States and our
coalition partners.
And that's exactly what we have
done thus
far, and that hasn't changed
based on the
enhancements that were announced
today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The announcement
comes as Iraqi
forces are gearing up to try to
push ISIS
militants out of Mosul, the
country's second
largest city.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Ethiopia,
government
troops are hunting gunmen from
South Sudan
who killed more than 200
civilians in a raid
on Friday. They also abducted
more than 100
children. It happened in an
eastern region
close to the country's border
with South Sudan.
The Ethiopians have now crossed
that border
in pursuit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A bomb set fire
to a bus in
Jerusalem and set fire to
another. At least
21 people were hurt. Police said
there is
no doubt it was a terror attack.
Two people
on the bus were seriously
wounded and the
rest of the victims were the
other bus and
a car. Such attacks have been
rare in recent
years.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Syrian
peace talks hit
a new snag today, when the
opposition suspended
its formal participation. Only
three delegates
from that side attended a
meeting with a U.N.
envoy in Geneva. A senior
negotiator pointed
to new attacks by government
forces inside
Syria.
MOHAMMAD ALLOUSH, Senior
Opposition Negotiator
(through translator): The
humanitarian conditions
and regime attacks and
violations of the cease-fire
negatively affect the political
process. We
need clear and concise answers,
and we need
an agenda reflecting real
political transition
in Syria. We want real
negotiations, not farcical
ones.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile,
Yemen's Shiite
rebels backed out of
U.N.-brokered peace talks
in Kuwait. They complained of
cease-fire violations
by Saudi Arabia and other
supporters of Yemen's
government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, the Pulitzer
Prizes were handed down for the
100th time.
The Associated Press won the
Public Service
Prize for its investigation of
slave labor
in seafood in Southeast Asia.
The Los Angeles
Times was honored for its
breaking news coverage
of the San Bernardino shootings,
and the hit
Broadway musical "Hamilton" won
the prize
for drama.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Wall Street
started the
week on a high note. The Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 106 points to
close at 18004.
The Nasdaq rose 21 points, and
the S&P 500
added 13.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And on this
Boston Marathon
day, runners from Ethiopia swept
the men's
and women's titles, ending
Kenya's dominance.
Some 30,000 people took part,
including victims
of the bombing three years ago
that killed
three people and wounded more
than 260 others.
Some ran with prosthetic blades.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the fate
of four million undocumented
immigrants before
the Supreme Court; the
candidates' final push
to win over voters in New York;
Brazil's president
facing impeachment; and much
more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There was just
one case
on the docket today for this
shorthanded Supreme
Court. But that case happened to
be one of
the biggest of the term: a
dispute over immigration
and the scope of presidential
power.
The arguments inside the court
drew hundreds
of pro-immigration demonstrators
outside,
chanting, "Yes, we can" in
Spanish. They were
there supporting the president's
program known
as DAPA, Deferred Action for
Parents of Americans.
It shields some four million
people from deportation.
LUIS ORTEGA, Son of Undocumented
Immigrant:
My dad travels all over the
state of Texas.
And every time he goes out, we
live in the
fear that he's going to be
deported. And families
shouldn't live like this.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Congressional
supporters
also turned out to defend the
president's
acting without congressional
approval.
REP. LUIS GUTIERREZ (D),
Illinois: The president
of the United States has taken
actions that
were clearly established today
in the court
that Ronald Reagan took, that
George Bush
took.
REP. ZOE LOFGREN (D),
California: It was made
abundantly clear that the
ability of the president
to grant deferred action is of
long standing
and based in statute and
regulation. To deny
that at this point would be an
extraordinary
departure from law and history.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But Texas and
25 two other
states have mounted the legal
challenge to
DAPA. They argue the president
did overstep
his constitutional authority.
KEN PAXTON, Texas Attorney
General: If we
allow a president, whether it's
this president
or a future president, no matter
what their
political persuasion or their
party, to make
changes in the law without
congressional approval,
then we will end up with a
perverted Constitution.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A small group
turned out
today to support that position,
including
several from Congress.
REP. STEVE KING (R), Iowa: It's
very clear,
even from the beginning, they
created groups
or classes of people that would
get blanket
amnesty under the directive
given by the president.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Lower courts
have put the
program on hold. But with the
death of Justice
Antonin Scalia, a 4-to-4 split
on the high
court would leave the program in
legal limbo.
We get more now on today's
arguments from
someone who was in the courtroom
today, Marcia
Coyle, chief Washington
correspondent for
"The National Law Journal" and a
"NewsHour"
regular.
So, what's at the core of the
dispute, from
what you heard today?
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
There are a number of issues
before the court
that Texas raises about this
program, but
the arguments today really
focused on two,
mainly two.
The first issue has to do --
it's a threshold
issue: Does Texas actually have
the right
to be in federal court suing the
government
over this program? This is what
we call standing
to sue. Texas argues that it
does have standing
because it will suffer an
injury, a financial
injury, in what it's going to
cost to deliver
license -- driver's licenses to
these immigrants.
The government contends they
don't have standing,
that this is not the kind of
injury. It's
an incidental injury. Texas
could easily change
its own law which provides these
licenses
to not give them to this
category of immigrants.
So, when -- the issue was
addressed right
away with the start of the
arguments.
And here you had the chief
justice and Justice
Alito for the most part
answering -- asking
the most skeptical questions of
the Obama
administration's lawyer,
Solicitor General
Donald Verrilli. Chief Justice
Roberts said,
for example, isn't money the
classic standing
injury? And, again, the
government, Mr. Verrilli
said, not in this case. This is
a case where
it's almost hypothetical. The
program hasn't
begun. Texas hasn't incurred an
injury yet.
Let them change their law.
And then the chief justice
responds, well,
if they change their law not to
give licenses,
won't you sue them? And that,
again, the -- Mr.
Verrilli said was hypothetical.
So, that was the first. And then
you had the
more liberal justices turning to
the standing
question with Texas' there,
Scott Keller.
And, there, Justice Breyer said
your view
of standing here, your injury
here is in a
way so broad that every time a
state has a
political disagreement with the
federal government,
it would sue the federal
government. We could
have a flood of litigation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So those are
the two big
issues.
MARCIA COYLE: That's one issue.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's just
one issue.
MARCIA COYLE: Yes.
The second issue is really the
fundamental
issue. Is this program legal?
Does it violate
the law? Did the president go a
step too far?
And there again, you saw almost
the ideological
breakdown. You had the
government saying,
we're exercising enforcement
discretion. There
are 11 million immigrants.
Congress never
appropriated enough money for us
to deport
all of them, but Congress does
give us this
enforcement discretion that
presidents have
been exercising for decades.
Texas says, uh-uh, this is a
different type
of program. By giving deferred
deportation
to a whole class of illegal
immigrants, you
are actually changing their
legal status,
and you can't do that without a
congressional
act.
There again, you saw Justice
Kennedy saying
to the Obama administration
lawyer, you seem
to be setting policy and asking
Congress to
follow along. That seems
upside-down.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So does this
-- the absence
of Justice Scalia increase the
likelihood
this is a 4-4 just by the way
that you're
asking -- you're telling us
where the justices
were pointing their questions?
MARCIA COYLE: Absolutely it
does. And when
I came out of the arguments, I
think it wasn't
clear to me at least how the
court was going
to resolve this.
If they find -- if they decide
4-4 that they're
on standing, for example, with
Texas -- or
even if they decide 5-4 -- I'm
sorry -- 5-3
that there is no standing,
that's the end
of the case for Texas. Texas
loses. But if
there is a 4-4 split, the case
will go on.
It will go back to the district
court in Texas
for a full trial.
This was just a preliminary
nationwide injunction
that is holding up the program
right now.
Note, the district court has not
ruled on
all of the merits yet.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Marcia Coyle
from "The National Law Journal,"
thanks so
much.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure, Hari.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And as we heard
earlier, tomorrow
marks the New York primary, a
critical contest
for both parties. The two
front-runners, Republican
Donald Trump and Democrat
Hillary Clinton,
both claim ties to the Empire
State.
Today, they jabbed opponents for
different
versions of their New York
values.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
You know, we love this city. You
look at the
other folks that are running,
they couldn't
care less about New York. We do
care about
New York, and we care about New
York a lot.
And we care about New York
values.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I know that we're going to win
because we're
on the right side of history. We
stand up
for New York values, which are
American values.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: To dissect that
New York brawl
and all the week's politics,
it's time for
Politics Monday.
That's analysis from Amy Walter
of The Cook
Political Report and Tamara
Keith of NPR,
who joins us from New York City.
And welcome back to both of you.
So, let's talk about New York.
Tamara, you're there. You're in
New York City.
What's the state of the
Democratic race? Let's
start with them.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: The state
of the Democratic race is that
they are both
running hard. Bernie Sanders a
little bit
later tonight has a very --
likely to be a
very large rally. He's been
having record-breaking
crowds at his rallies.
And, meanwhile, Hillary Clinton
is racing
from borough to borough doing
sort of small
retail politics kind of events,
more of a
traditional way of running in
New York. And
the polling would indicate that
Hillary Clinton,
this is her -- the state she was
elected to
twice in the Senate, that she is
favored.
The Sanders campaign is in their
fund-raising
e-mails saying, well, we don't
actually have
to win. We just have to win a
lot of delegates.
So, I think that the Sanders
campaign is trying
to set expectations, and the
Clinton campaign
has said things like, well, this
might be
closer than the public polls
would have you
indicate. So, it's a race, but
all indications
are that Clinton has the
stronger position
in New York heading into the
voting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy, what do you
make of it?
Bernie Sanders is out there
drawing these
huge crowds, what, 20-some
thousand last night,
but Hillary Clinton's ahead in
the polls.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: New
York is really a question of,
will Hillary
Clinton be able to get her
groove back?
And she's been on the defensive
for the last
few weeks here. Bernie Sanders
has won eight
of the last nine contests. He
has outraised
her when it comes to
fund-raising. He's put
her on defensive on a whole host
of issues,
most specifically whether she
will release
these transcripts of speeches
she gave to
Goldman Sachs.
It has not been a good couple of
weeks to
be Hillary Clinton. This is her
chance to
sort of reset the race, reset
the narrative,
especially if she wins it by a
significant
amount. She will get to focus
then on the
things she likes talking about
more, which
is the math, and the delegate
math and how
difficult it will be for Bernie
Sanders to
catch up.
If it's close, she still gets
the most delegates,
she is still is on the way to
locking up the
nomination, but it gives Bernie
Sanders the
argument that the momentum is
still behind
him, the race is closing. We had
a new poll
out today, national poll of
Democrats showing
Hillary Clinton up by two
points. National
polls don't mean anything when
you have regional
primaries. But it just shows
that this race
has tightened a great deal over
the course
of this campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How could the
dynamic change,
Tamara?
Bernie Sanders continues to talk
about how
much money Hillary Clinton is
raking in from
big money sources. And, in fact,
George Clooney,
the actor who with his wife gave
Hillary Clinton
a highly publicized fund-raiser
over the weekend,
I guess the big tickets were
$350,000 a person
or a couple -- Clooney himself
said over the
weekend, these are obscene
amounts of money.
Does this hurt Hillary Clinton
or what?
TAMARA KEITH: This is certainly
an area where
Bernie Sanders has some
strength.
He's been, as we know very well,
$27 at a
time, been able to outraise
Hillary Clinton.
And his fund-raising isn't just
about money.
It's about his message. The
money is the message
for Bernie Sanders. Just today,
his campaign
sent a letter to the DNC
complaining about
and saying that maybe some sort
of violation
had happened in how Hillary
Clinton is raising
money with the DNC at this
fund-raiser at
Clooney's house where they were
able to raise
this much money.
It's through the Hillary Victor
Fund. It's
a complicated system. Sanders is
pointing
to it, saying that this is
somehow a violation.
The Clinton campaign is firing
back, saying,
hey, look, Hillary Clinton is
raising money
for down-ballot races. They are
fighting about
fund-raising and that is really
better territory
for Bernie Sanders, because he
has a story
that he can tell, a story $27 at
a time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is this something
with traction,
Amy? We have been hearing about
it for so
long.
AMY WALTER: Well, the real
question in my
mind is what happens when this
race is over.
If Hillary Clinton continues to
pick up delegates,
stays on the path, she wins the
nomination,
does she bring these voters
back?
This is always the debate we
have, Judy, every
single election. Is the primary
good for party?
Is it bad? Are you going to have
disappointed,
disaffected Bernie Sanders
supporters who
do listen to his attacks on her
fund-raising,
have taken that to heart? Are
they going to
be open to coming back?
This is the fine line that she's
had to walk
for these last few weeks here,
few months
now, which is going and making
sure that she
makes her case to the public and
to Democratic
primary voters without
alienating Bernie Sanders
supporters that she is going to
need back
when we hit November.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I don't
know if over
on the Republican side there is
this kind
of worrying at this point about
alienating
the other guys' supporters.
But, Tamara, there is still a
race in New
York, but Donald Trump is still
pretty far
ahead. What are we going to
learn from New
York on the Republican side?
TAMARA KEITH: The thing with the
Republican
race is, every time there is
voting, we say,
oh, my gosh, well, is this a
trend or is this
a one-time blip? Well, this is
Donald Trump's
home state, and he is expected
to do quite
well here.
I think that what we learn is
how well he
does. And if Donald Trump is
able to continue
adding up delegates, that is
important for
Donald Trump. If Ted Cruz and
John Kasich
are able to chip away at that
and get a few
of those Delegates from the
state, well, then
that's just a few delegates that
keep Donald
Trump away from getting that
elusive 1,237,
the number of delegates he needs
to clinch
the nomination.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Amy,
meantime, Ted Cruz
has been racking up delegates in
state after
state, where they're going about
the business
of picking the people to fill
these delegate
slots.
He's been able to pick up some
points, at
least P.R. points, you were
writing.
AMY WALTER: Well, yes, my
argument right now
is that where Ted Cruz is very
good is at
the nuts and the bolts of the
campaigning,
doing things, as you said, to go
and do the
grassroots organizing, the hard
work that
it takes to actually get these
delegates in
these states at these
conventions.
Donald Trump is terrible at nuts
and bolts.
He's been terrible at picking up
these delegates.
His team has only come on in the
last couple
of weeks trying to get into the
game. But
he's very good at the P.R. and
the marketing.
And right now, the marketing
campaign for
Donald Trump of course is, this
game's rigged,
I'm the biggest winner.
And so I think if Donald Trump
comes out in
New York with a big head of
steam, he wins
either all the delegates or most
of the delegates,
we go into April 26 in states
where he also
should be successful, he keeps
winning there,
it makes his argument more
salient that, look,
I'm the winner, I have the most,
this 1,237
number is sort of arbitrary,
this getting
the delegates thing seems sort
of rigged.
And, right now, at least in the
most recent
polling we saw from NBC/Wall
Street Journal,
the majority of Republicans are
with Donald
Trump on this argument. They say
the person
who has the most delegates and
the most votes
coming into the convention
should be the nominee.
So, this is a battle between
this P.R. and
the grassroots organizing that
we are going
to continue to see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's gotten
to the point
where, if we keep hearing about
small numbers
of delegates, we don't know
where this is
going the head.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But tomorrow
night will be
important.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter,
Tamara Keith, thank
you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
AMY WALTER: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will have
more election
coverage, as we just mentioned,
including
that crucial New York primary,
tomorrow night.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": on
this tax day,
the IRS commissioner talks
cyber-security
and budget fights; what happens
when India's
sacred cows become political;
and, as summer
nears, the growing threat of
Zika here at
home.
But, first: The overwhelming
vote to impeach
Brazil's President Dilma
Rousseff has deepened
the crisis in South America's
largest nation.
We begin with this report from
Guillermo Galdos
of Independent Television News.
GUILLERMO GALDOS: Political
goals don't come
much bigger.
MAN (through translator): We
have been working
on this for a long time,
believing that something
had to change.
GUILLERMO GALDOS: As with any
win, there is
always a loser. And for the
president's supporters,
those trying to remove Dilma
Rousseff are
playing a dirty game.
WOMAN (through translator): This
fascist Congress
wants to lead a coup d'etat on
Brazil's democracy.
We will resist and always fight
for democracy.
GUILLERMO GALDOS: From the
streets of the
capital to Congress, Brazil is
now a house
divided. Rousseff stands accused
of fiddling
the national accounts to hide
the budget deficit
before her reelection in 2015.
Yet a third
of Brazil's lawmakers are being
investigated
for corruption themselves.
Having ruled for 13 years,
Brazil's Workers'
Party, the P.T., is now on the
ropes. After
her election in 2011, Dilma once
enjoyed 90
percent approval ratings. Those
days are long
gone. Even her popular
predecessor, Lula da
Silva, is now mired in his own
corruption
scandals.
JOSE EDUARDO CARDOZO, Brazilian
Attorney General
(through translator): I heard
people saying,
is she going to resign? Is she
becoming weak
several times? No, a person who
believes in
a just cause fights on until the
end, to have
it written in history that she
wasn't a coward.
GUILLERMO GALDOS: Brazil is
facing its worst
recession since the 1930s, and
60 percent
of the country is now against
her.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For more on
the tumultuous
events in Brazil, as the country
deals with
the Zika virus and the upcoming
Summer Olympics,
I'm joined by Lourdes
Garcia-Navarro, the
Brazil bureau chief for National
Public Radio.
She joins me tonight from NPR's
headquarters
here in Washington.
First, how do we get to this
point? Is it
that old phrase, it's the
economy?
LOURDES GARCIA-NAVARRO, National
Public Radio:
Well, I think that's certainly
part of it.
The economy in Brazil is doing
extremely badly.
It contracted by 3.8 percent
last year alone.
It's expected to contract by the
same this
year.
It's shedding jobs at an
alarming rate. People
are extremely anxious. They're
angry. And
they're taking it out on the
leader, President
Dilma Rousseff. She has record
low popularity.
Only about 10 percent of the
country approve
of her leadership. And about 60
percent wanted
to see her impeached.
And so the economy really is a
key factor
in all this, but, of course,
there are other
things, like a massive
corruption scandal
that has been engulfing the
government, and
that really has also really
affected very
much her presidency and led to
this right
now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, as far as
corruption
scandals go, how bad is this
compared to what
might have happened with her
predecessors
or in the political climate of
Brazil?
LOURDES GARCIA-NAVARRO: Well, I
mean, it's
really hard to know, because
what I think
is really interesting about this
corruption
scandal is that, for the first
time, it's
coming to light.
And it has really shocked the
Brazilian population,
which has really felt, I think
up until now,
inured in some sense to
corruption. They really
haven't cared very much about
it.
But when this came to light, it
really shocked
them. And because And it was
because it was
about the state oil company. You
have to understand
that Petrobras, the state oil
company, is
the crown jewel for the
government. It's a
massive source of income.
And what was uncovered was a
scheme by which
politicians and businessmen were
bilking it
for billions and billions of
dollars. And
it was really shocking to many,
many people.
And that has had wide-ranging
effects. And
so many people have been
implicated.
Billionaires have been put in
prison, politicians
are under indictment. It's a
corruption scandal
that has really shocked and
engulfed Brazil.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How likely is
Rousseff then
to be removed from office?
LOURDES GARCIA-NAVARRO: I think,
at this point,
extremely likely.
The government was very
disheartened, of course,
by what happened on Sunday
night. It went
much worse than had originally
been expected.
But you also have to understand
that what's
happening in Brazil is very,
very difficult
for the population.
Even though most of the people
in Brazil want
Dilma Rousseff gone, they do
look at the people
that might succeed her and they
are very skeptical
of them, too. The vice
president, Michel Temer,
has approval ratings similar to
Dilma Rousseff.
About 57 percent of the
population do not
like him.
After him comes the speaker of
the house,
Eduardo Cunha, who has been
implicated in
that massive corruption scandal.
He is accused
of having embezzled millions of
dollars and
having secret Swiss bank
accounts where he
stashed it all.
So, you look at the political
class in Brazil,
and for ordinary Brazilians,
they don't see
a lot of hope there. They don't
see a good
way forward.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, are there
people concerned
about the long-term stability
for not just
Brazil, but the region, because
of how powerful
Brazil is?
LOURDES GARCIA-NAVARRO: Yes,
Brazil is extremely
powerful.
It is the largest democracy in
the Americas,
the largest economy in South
America and Central
America. So it is extremely
worrying for many,
many people. And, yes,
instability is a big
concern.
The economy is in a freefall, as
we mentioned.
But the political class also
seems to be frozen.
And let's not forget they're
dealing with
the Zika virus. They don't have
a health minister
right now. They are dealing with
the Olympics
coming up. They just had to
replace the sports
minister.
If the new government comes in,
if Dilma Rousseff
is indeed removed from office,
how much legitimacy
will a new government have in
the eyes of
the international community,
considering that
so many people look at the
political class
that enacted this -- these
impeachment proceedings,
and see many, many people who
are themselves
the subject of corruption
investigations?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yesterday,
when we saw some
of the imagery, it was almost
like it was
a World Cup soccer game. People
were painted
in flags.
And it was I'm with this or I'm
with the other
team, right? And they were out
there. But,
as you mentioned, there are some
deep systemic
problems. What are the people on
the street
and the people that you speak to
concerned
about on -- this particular
problem is solvable.
Let's say we get this particular
person out
of office. Then what?
LOURDES GARCIA-NAVARRO: Yes. I
mean, it's
a very difficult situation.
I recently traveled to the north
of the country.
This is the place where the
ruling party,
Dilma Rousseff's party and her
predecessor,
Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, that
was really
their bastion of support. It's
the poorer,
blacker part of the country. And
it has really
been helped a lot by the ruling
party and
many of their social policies.
But when I went up there, many
of the people
said that they had just lost
faith in the
government, that they were now
supporting
the removal of Dilma Rousseff.
And that is
because many people are facing a
loss of jobs.
They have no money. And they
have very -- they
don't really have a lot of hope
in the future.
And that has really, I think,
been the fatal
blow to this administration.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Lourdes Garcia-Navarro
of National Public Radio, thanks
so much.
LOURDES GARCIA-NAVARRO: You're
welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is the day
that the tax
man cometh, or, more accurately,
the day when
millions of Americans will
finish filing their
taxes.
The Internal Revenue Service is
never popular
again. But this year, it's
facing ever tougher
scrutiny, especially from
Republicans in Congress.
Last week, lawmakers repeatedly
pressed IRS
Commissioner John Koskinen on
why the agency
wasn't moving faster to improve
cyber-security.
The IRS has acknowledged hackers
were able
to breach its computers last
year and swipe
sensitive information about
hundreds of thousands
of taxpayers.
John Koskinen joins me now.
Mr. Koskinen, thank you for
being with us.
JOHN KOSKINEN, IRS Commissioner:
Delighted
to be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is it going
to take to
restore the confidence of the
American people
in the IRS?
JOHN KOSKINEN: Well, I think
what we have
to do is first demonstrate to
them that it's
a fair system, that, if you hear
from us,
it's because of something in
your return,
not because who you voted for,
what party
you belong to, what church you
go to.
Also, I think they have to
understand that
security of our data is a high
priority. Our
systems are secure. The problem
has been that
criminals organized around the
world have
a vast amount of personal
information available
to them. And so they are
increasingly successful
as masquerading as taxpayers.
So, when they have gotten into
some of our
applications, it's because they
had already
stolen the information somewhere
else and
could in fact pretend very
effectively that
they were the taxpayer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, when members
of Congress
after the IRS, come after you
and say, why
aren't you able to prevent this
kind of thing,
do you say it is just not
doable?
JOHN KOSKINEN: No, I say that we
need to and
are continuing to increase the
levels of security,
the authentication we require of
taxpayers
before they have access to
significant applications
that we're developing and
continuing to roll
out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's it?
JOHN KOSKINEN: And that's it.
Well, and I think we have taken
down the applications
-- two applications that were
accessed by
criminals masquerading as
taxpayers. And we
will bring them back up with
higher levels
of authentication. But,
unfortunately, while
it makes it more difficult, if
not possible
for the criminals to get
through, it will
be a little more difficult for
the taxpayers
to get through as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There are some
who look at
your -- well, many look at your
agency and
say it feels it's been dogged by
one thing
after another. There was a
controversy a few
years ago over the appearance
that the IRS
was holding up approval of
tax-exempt status
for these conservative nonprofit
groups.
There was then this breach of
security. And
I will ask you in a minute about
the Panama
Papers. Question, is the IRS, is
it really
in a situation where it can't
win, where there's
just perpetually going to be one
problem after
another that is gripping this
agency?
JOHN KOSKINEN: Well, I think
there are always
challenges in this day and age
for agencies.
I think, ultimately, the IRS
does a remarkable
job of processing tax returns
efficiently
and effectively and promptly,
dealing with
taxpayers. If we have the
funding, we provide
very good levels of service for
taxpayers.
But we continue, like all
financial institutions,
to have challenges, as I say,
particularly
with the organized crime
syndicates we're
dealing with all around the
world. Our systems
are attacked over a million
times a day by
people trying to get access,
which, fortunately,
thus far, they haven't been able
to get as
far as our basic systems.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mentioned
adequate funding.
It's something, I think, many
Americans look
at the IRS and they say, well,
why do you
need more money? You already
have so much.
And, you know, why can't you
make do with
what you have?
JOHN KOSKINEN: Well, our budget
was cut for
five years in a row from 2010 to
2015 by over
$1 billion, which meant that we
have lost
15,000 to 17,000 employees over
that time
frame.
So, while we need to be more
efficient and
are working to do that, at some
point -- we
have 10 million more taxpayers
than we had
-- at some point, you actually
begin to destroy
the effectiveness of the agency.
So whether
it's taxpayer service, taxpayer
enforcement,
or even protection of the
database, as we
continue to struggle for
funding, we continue
to be at risk.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what does
that mean for
the American people?
JOHN KOSKINEN: Well, it means
that we estimate
we are collecting $4 billion or
$5 billion
a year less than we would if we
had 5,000
revenue agents, officers and
criminal investigators
we used to have five years ago.
It means that, as we
demonstrated this year
-- Congress gave us additional
funding for
2016 for taxpayer service, and
the level of
taxpayer service on the phones
doubled. Instead
of only 37 percent getting
through, over 70
percent got through. It's a
direct line of,
if you give us the money, and we
can hire
people, they will be able to
answer the phone.
If you don't give us money, we
can't hire
the people during filling
season, and it will
be much harder to get an answer
on the phone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Would it be
easier if -- we
know some of the Republican
candidates for
president are saying, what needs
to be done
is, we just need a
one-postcard-sized filing
form for every American or
virtually every
American.
Could something like that be an
answer for
the IRS?
JOHN KOSKINEN: Well, clearly,
life would be
simpler for taxpayers and
simpler for us if
the tax code were simpler. It
doesn't -- not
even necessarily to a postcard,
but it is
obviously overly complicated for
everyone
at this point in time.
So, we have been great
supporters of tax
simplification.
The policy issues are the domain
of the Congress
and the administration. We do
tax administration,
but I have made it clear that
tax administration
would be a lot easier and more
effective and
efficient if the code were
simpler. And so
whatever we can do to support
that, we're
happy to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
finally, John
Koskinen, about the Panama
Papers, this blockbuster
news report that came out a few
weeks ago
about thousands of wealthy
people around the
world, including some Americans,
who put their
money in offshore bank accounts
in an effort
to avoid paying tax.
Is this something the IRS knew
about ahead
of time, or did you only learn
about it because
of this really over a year of
very complex
reporting that was done by a
number of news
organizations working together?
JOHN KOSKINEN: We didn't know
about this particular
set of data until we heard about
it through
the press.
We obviously had had a
full-court press for
the last four or five years on
offshore tax
evasion. We have had agreements
with numerous
Swiss banks that have revealed
untold numbers
of accounts. We have created a
voluntary disclosure
program that over six or seven
million Americans
have taken advantage of.
So, hiding your assets and
avoiding taxes
anywhere in the world is getting
a lot more
difficult.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you find that
it's now much
easier to go after these
individuals because
of this kind of reporting, or
does this -- how
much difference does this make?
JOHN KOSKINEN: Well, I think
this reporting
will help. We're working with a
number of
tax administrations around the
world to collect
this particular data and
cooperate on following
through with it.
But I think what's happening for
compliance
generally is, increasingly, I
think, wealthy
investors and taxpayers around
the world are
discovering that there is a
growing global
coalition focused on ending tax
evasion through
foreign accounts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On that note, we
will leave
it.
John Koskinen, the commissioner
of the Internal
Revenue Service, on Tax Day,
thank you for
joining us.
JOHN KOSKINEN: Thanks for
inviting me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: India's
history is punctuated
by spasms of religious violence.
The trigger
HARI SREENIVASAN: India's
history is punctuated
by spasms of religious violence.
The trigger
for recent incidents has been
over the consumption
of beef, an age-old controversy
that traces
itself to the sanctity of cows
in Hinduism.
From New Delhi, Fred de Sam
Lazaro reports.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Last
October, in a village
not far from India's capital, a
56-year-old
Muslim man was beaten to death
and his son
gravely injured by an allegedly
Hindu mob.
His alleged crime? A rumor that
he had slaughtered
a cow, an animal considered
sacred to Hindus.
Mohammad Akhlaq's home was
ransacked, including
the contents of the
refrigerator, before the
police arrived.
It was perhaps the most
egregious in a spate
of recent such incidents. They
have alarmed
many liberals and especially
leaders of the
significant Muslim minority who
fear a rising
intolerance in this largely
Hindu nation.
ASSADUDDIN OWAISI, All India
Council of the
Union of Muslims (through
translator): The
psyche that spawns an incident
like this is
against India's secularism and
brotherhood.
It is thinking that looks down
upon Muslims
with distrust. This incident was
not triggered
by the beef issue. They murdered
him on religious
grounds.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: MDNM /It
turns out the
meat found in Akhlaq's
refrigerator was mutton,
not beef, but the beef issue has
been a political
hot potato, one that's endured
even as the
country has entered the
globalized economy.
You won't find beef in a Burger
King anywhere
in India, for example, or a
McDonald's. Here,
burgers come from sheep,
chickens, even vegetables,
but not cows. Paradoxically, the
animals roam
freely on the street --
vulnerable to poisonous
garbage and to being captured
and taken to
slaughter at night, though there
are efforts
to crack down on that illegal
practice and
to herd cows into shelters.
DEVENDER NAYAK, Magazine Editor
(through translator):
We don't even believe that the
cow is an animal.
We see it as a manifestation of
God. Our magazine
tries to educate people about
the Mother Cow,
about the benefits of the cow.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Hindus -- 80
percent of
India's 1.2 billion people --
have long venerated
the cow. It is the favorite
animal of the
deity Lord Krishna, and that
reverence in
turn is likely linked to the
animal's utility.
Devender Nayak edits a magazine
dedicated
to improving awareness of the
cow's significance.
DEVENDER NAYAK there A poor
family can sustain
themselves with just one family
of cows. They
can sell the milk, use the dung
and the urine,
which has many medicinal
properties.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Whether that
reverence
should mean an outright ban on
beef has been
a vexing issue ever since
independence in
1947 from the beef-loving
British rulers.
The father of modern India, a
Hindu, professed
his love for the cow, but
Mahatma Gandhi said
he would not impose his views on
Muslims,
Christians, as well as Hindus in
some regions
who do consume beef.
Nonetheless, India's
constitution, while not
outlawing cow slaughter, urges
individual
states to do so.
SHASHI THAROOR, Opposition
Member of Parliament:
India is a federal country, and
so many states
have gone ahead and outright
banned cow slaughter.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Shashi
Tharoor is an author
and member of the opposition
Congress, the
once-powerful party of Gandhi
and Nehru. For
years, under Congress rule,
there was an accommodation
of beef consumption in minority
and many urban
communities. But that changed
with the election
in 2014 of a Hindu nationalist
Bharatiya Janata
Party, or BJP, led by
charismatic Prime Minister
Narendra Modi.
SHASHI THAROOR: The BJP has
essentially encouraged
a more proactive and aggressive
form of Hindu
chauvinism. That's the sort of
polarization
that could be deeply damaging to
India's stability
in its future.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In a recent
speech in
Parliament, Tharoor said the
frequent reports
of vigilante groups targeting
minorities,
of rising intolerance, is coming
at the cost
of India's reputation.
SHASHI THAROOR: A Bangladeshi
friend of mine
who was visiting Delhi last week
and he told
me that Islamic fundamentalists
in his country
were having a field day
attacking India as
a place where it is safer to be
a cow than
a Muslim.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Is that a
bit of hyperbole?
SHASHI THAROOR: It is a bit of
hyperbole.
I think that it's high time that
the government
realize that they're making
asses of themselves
and discrediting an enormously
plural and
diverse civilization.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: For his
part, Prime Minister
Modi, though allied with Hindu
nationalist
groups, has not involved himself
in their
key demand, that India declare
itself a Hindu
nation. Modi has stuck to the
pro-business
economic development theme he's
struck ever
since ascending to office.
NARENDRA MODI, India Prime
Minister (through
translator): Our country can
only prosper
if Hindus and Muslims unite to
fight against
poverty and we defeat poverty.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Coming
several days after
the murder of Mohammad Akhlaq,
Modi was criticized
for saying too little too late
and for not
reining in vigilante groups and
some members
of his party who made statements
appearing
to support them.
But Modi's supporters say it is
the opposition
that is using divisive religion
politics for
their own gain.
MUKHTAR ABBAS NAQVI, Minister
for Minority
Affairs (through translator):
The prime minister
has repeatedly said that, if the
country should
remain united, everyone will
have to walk
hand in hand for development.
But there are
certain politicians that promote
pseudo-secularism
and are not ready to hear his
message.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The key
question is whether
the so-called beef issue
represents the normal
ebb and flow of a vibrant, if
sometimes violent,
democracy or whether, in fact,
that democracy
faces a new, real threat.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro in New Delhi.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fred's reporting
is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at University
of St. Thomas in Minnesota. A
version of this
story aired on the PBS program
"Religion & Ethics
Newsweekly."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally
tonight: worries
over a potential Zika outbreak
in the U.S.,
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally
tonight: worries
over a potential Zika outbreak
in the U.S.,
and who may suffer a bigger
impact.
Public health officials have
been increasingly
concerned about the virus
spreading via mosquitoes
this summer. One report even
suggested government
officials were split over
whether to advise
women to avoid pregnancy in
areas where Zika
is circulating.
In an op-ed titled "Zika Is
Coming," Dr. Peter
Hotez focused on some of these
questions and
what it might mean in some
cities in the southern
parts of the country. He's the
dean of the
National School of Tropical
Medicine at Baylor
College of Medicine and a
pediatrician and
microbiologist at Texas
Children's Hospital.
I interviewed him from our New
York studios.
I want to read you the first
sentence of the
op-ed you wrote in The New York
Times recently.
It said: "If I were a pregnant
woman living
on the Gulf Coast or in Florida
in an impoverished
neighborhood and city like
Houston, New Orleans,
Miami, Biloxi, Mississippi, or
Mobile, Alabama,
I would be nervous right now."
Explain.
DR. PETER HOTEZ, Texas
Children's Hospital:
Well, the reason I made that
statement, Hari,
was because what we know, where
this terrible
birth defect, microcephaly, is
happening.
It happens when pregnant women
are bitten
by the Aedes mosquitoes. So, the
first requirement
is, it has to be a part of the
world where
we have the Aedes mosquito. And,
also, the
other component that not many
people appropriate
is both crowding and poverty.
And the reason why poverty is so
important
is because women who live in
poverty have
increased exposure to mosquitoes
because of
absent -- or broken window
screens, collected
garbage, environmental
degradation near the
home that breeds mosquitoes.
And so what you have on the Gulf
Coast of
the U.S. is the perfect storm of
all three
factors, the Aedes aegypti
mosquito, the extreme
poverty and crowding, that you
would find
in Northeastern Brazil, which is
the epicenter
of this epidemic or what we have
seen moving
into Colombia.
So, for all the reasons we're
seeing microcephaly
cases appear in Brazil and
Colombia, I believe
we're going to see on the Gulf
Coast, especially
as we move into the warmer
months, when our
mosquito numbers start to rise.
So we're already finding Aedes
aegypti mosquitoes
on the Gulf Coast, including
here in Houston.
But I'm very worried that as we
go into the
warmer months, those mosquito
numbers are
going to incline, with it, the
poorer neighborhoods
on Gulf Coast cities, such as
Houston, New
Orleans, others, are really
going to be affected
by Zika.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, what's
that timeline
of progression that you see? Not
all mosquitoes
have Zika. It will take some
time for some
of them to get Zika, and then
some of them
to bite people, some of those
people to have
symptoms, some of those symptoms
to be severe.
DR. PETER HOTEZ: Well,
arboviruses, viruses
transmitted by mosquitoes are
not new to the
Gulf Coast. We have experienced
a number of
epidemics of arboviral
infections.
For instance, in 2003, Houston
experienced
an epidemic dengue fever caused
by the same
Aedes aegypti mosquito. And what
we found
was, those numbers started to
rise in May
and into June, and with it, we
then started
seeing a dengue outbreak back in
2003.
So, I would expect, if Zika is
going to strike
the Gulf Coast, it would go by a
similar playbook.
Beginning in May, June, into the
summer months
is when we could see start
seeing Zika transmission
on the Gulf Coast.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Should local
health officials
be advising women to delay
pregnancy?
DR. PETER HOTEZ: Well, it
depends really where
we're talking about.
So, right now, Zika is rampaging
through Puerto
Rico. According to the CDC,
maybe half or
even more of the island is going
to be infected
by the Zika virus within the
coming weeks.
And this is how Zika goes. It
affects the
immunologically naive population
and sweeps
through it very quickly over a
period of months.
We saw this in Micronesia and
French Polynesia
and Brazil and now in Puerto
Rico. So, during
that time period, I'm of the
opinion, if it's
possible, to try and delay
pregnancy during
that time when large numbers of
women are
getting exposed to the Zika
virus. Having
said that, it's easier said than
done.
We have to remember the problem
of advising
women to delay pregnancy, who is
Zika affecting?
It's affecting predominantly
women who live
in poverty, not exclusively, but
that's disproportionately
affecting women who are
impoverished.
So it's a very tough call. Right
now, we do
not have Zika virus transmission
on the Gulf
Coast, so I wouldn't make that
recommendation,
but it's something that we're
going to have
to revisit as we get into the
warmer months.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What about the
idea of false-positive
cases that have happened in
Brazil, and that
so many Zika infections don't
even lead to
the equivalent of a cold or mild
fever?
DR. PETER HOTEZ: Well, we're
starting to change
our opinion on the virus.
You know, we used to say that 80
percent of
cases are without symptoms,
asymptomatic.
That's probably an overestimate.
The real
question that we would like to
know is, if
you're a pregnant woman and you
become pregnant
with the Zika virus, what's the
likelihood
you're going to give birth to a
baby with
microcephaly or other terrible
congenital
birth defects?
So, the stakes are very high. I
think, for
now, we have to assume that if a
mother is
infected with the Zika virus,
the likelihood
that she will give rise to a
baby with micro
-- that she will give birth to a
baby with
microcephaly is significant, and
we have to
plan accordingly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dr. Peter
Hotez from the
Texas Children's Hospital and
Baylor College
of Medicine, thanks so much.
DR. PETER HOTEZ: Thanks for
having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: Genetic
testing can help diagnose a
disease and estimate
your future risks, based on DNA.
But the number of genetic
counselors, the
people who help both doctors and
patients
make sense of these tests,
hasn't expanded
enough to keep up with demand.
Read why this
type of care is more popular
than ever.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Later tonight,
Charlie Rose
talks with actress Susan
Sarandon and Rose
Byrne on their new film, "The
Meddler."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, as New York state
voters go to
the polls, we will look at where
things stand
in the Republican and Democratic
presidential
primary contests.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.